[music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio
news.
[music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy
Aloway [music]
>> and I'm Joe Weisenthal.
>> So Joe, Trump nominated Kevin Worsh to
be Fed Chair last week. We've been
talking about it on the show. Obviously,
this has big market implications, but
I'm starting to think that the
sociological
questions and aspects of this are kind
of more interesting.
>> I'm so intrigued by the constellation of
people who have come out either in
support or opposition of this name. It
is not like any other nominee that I can
recall where you have fairly sort of
mainstream even sort of liberal names
like Jason Ferman or Gita Goponath uh
saying there's a great pick etc and then
you have Paul Krugman and Neil Da saying
this is a terrible pick and so forth. It
is it it cuts in ways that I would not
have necessarily anticipated not like
any other Trump pick that I recall.
>> Yeah, it is very split and it feels like
there's a split within Worsh's own
thinking as well. Right? Because here we
have a guy who has talked about wanting
to overhaul the Fed, right? And even
break some heads, I think was a direct
quote that we've mentioned before. He
has given a speech that is literally
titled an ode to independence at the
central bank. But
>> at the same time, there's a big question
mark about how and why he has suddenly
seemingly gone from an inflation hawk to
someone who's advocating for low rates.
>> Totally. And of course I think I mean
for you know just to be blunt this would
have been something that any nominee
from this administration to some extent
there would have been question marks
around because you know obviously Trump
has been very critical of uh Jerome
Powell despite the fact that he
nominated him himself and it's clear
that he wants a low rates now kind of
guy in there. He said after the
nomination he's like you know he didn't
make many promises but he's going to I
think he's going to be a low rates guy.
And then he joked a couple of days later
that he was going to sue about to bring
that up and that was a you know he was
joking. He said he was going to sue if
war
>> joke
is yeah joke air quotes you don't know
it but this has been the big thing and
so the question is the degree to which
an incoming Fed chair presume if he
passes the Senate which isn't guaranteed
but if he passes the Senate can
establish his commitment to what he's
long talked about which is Fed
independence while also you know not
immediately
angering the guy who nominated him
>> exactly
>> to the extent that that matters. Exactly
right. So, we need to talk about all of
this, get a little bit more color on, I
guess, Fedboard culture,
>> and political minations as well, and
market implications, of course. And we
really do have the perfect guest. We're
going to be speaking with Richard
Clarida. He is of course global economic
adviser at PIMCO, a professor of
economics at Colombia and most
importantly for the purpose of this
particular conversation, he's a former
vice chair of the Federal Reserve Board.
So honestly the perfect guest. Rich,
thanks for coming back on the show.
>> Thank you. Looking forward to our
discussion.
>> So why don't I just start with the very
obvious question and we can dig in from
there. But last week when the news broke
about Worsh being selected by Trump,
what was the first thought that went
through your head?
>> I think it's a very sensible choice. It
it makes sense along important
dimensions. In particular, it's
important because I think based upon
background and and what he's been
writing recently that wars will work
very well with Scott Bessant at at the
Treasury. there is Fed independence that
we'll get into, but it's important as a
practical matter that the Fed work well
with the the Treasury and so it makes
sense along a lot of uh uh dimensions.
Actually, let's just get into that
because I do find that to be very
interesting. Say more about working with
the Treasury. You know, some people
would say that is not the Fed's job. In
fact, I would say, you know, Kevin Worsh
going back to the immediate post great
financial crisis era had talked about
how, for example, it's not the Fed's job
to backs stop fiscal policy. It's not
the Fed's job to enable larger deficits,
which he, I believe, saw QE as enabling.
But from your perspective, talk to us
about what a positive relationship
between uh the Fed chair and the
Treasury Secretary looks like.
>> Yeah, it thank you for letting me add
some color. to that because there there
dimensions and domains where it would
actually be a very bad idea for the the
Fed to be dominated by the Treasury. But
along several dimensions, a
collaborative working relationship is
important and I'll name name several.
First is the Fed going back to its
founding is the fiscal agent of the the
government. it has a responsibility to
make sure that the treasury market has
adequate liquidity that it functions
properly. Um, and so that that's an
important element of of the job and
always has been. It's also important
because the Fed uh has an important role
in bank regulation but not a not a
monopoly role. The the controller of the
currency which is within Treasury also
has a a regulation responsibility as
FDIC. So as a matter of necessity on
bank regulation there there needs to be
a degree of of of coordination and and
so I would really highlight those two
areas.
>> So I mentioned at the beginning that I'm
kind of interested in the inner
functioning of the Fed board. From your
perspective,
how does communication between the Fed
and the Treasury actually happen? I'm
sort of envisioning like I don't know a
WhatsApp or signal group chat
>> there. There is a tradition, it's not in
statute, there is a tradition that the
Treasury Secretary and the Fed chair
meet on a regular basis, oftentimes over
uh breakfast. And so during my time,
that was the primary uh point of contact
was bilateral between when I was there
Jay Pal and Steven Minutuchin and then
when Janet Yellen became Treasury
Secretary. So that's informal. There are
typically not staff uh in the room uh
for that. There's also the financial
stability oversight council which was a
creation in DoddFrank which by statute
is chaired by the treasury secretary and
then the there fed among other uh
agencies also participates in that
process. And then thirdly as I mentioned
anything involving a bank regulation is
typically going to involve if the senior
or even the vice chair for supervision
level interaction on bank regulation.
You know, let's get into some of the, I
guess, criticisms or perhaps questions
about Kevin Worsh. And there's a few
different dimensions. One is, of course,
there's perception that he's long been
an inflation hawk and suddenly he's
sounded more dovish over the last, you
know, 12, 18 months or whatever. Setting
that aside though, you know, some of the
criticisms start early on, including his
judgment around the great financial
crisis. Concerned more about inflation,
you know, even up into fall 2008 than
employment right on the eve of collapse.
Also seemed to get very anxious about
inflation soon coming out of the worst
of it, etc. But like when you think
about okay like his qualifications and
what we can expect from him, how much
like when you go back to that era, how
much should we hold that against him
perhaps? Either that he was off the mark
or that he was at least very far out of
consensus at the time. Well, I think you
have to look at the entire picture and
and Kevin was also very involved with
Ben and and and and Tim Gner and and
Dudley and the crisis response to the
global financial crisis which really
played out over a period of 12 to 18
months and I think by most accounts in
my judgment that was a you he actually
added a lot of value in in the fog of
war. inflation as I myself learned
especially in periods of crisis and
unusual large shocks inflation
forecasting can be can be challenging.
So I don't think I would hold that
particular episode against him. I think
it does fairly characterize the way that
most of us think about Kevin throughout
during that period and really the last
15 years is he has been a pretty
consistent critic of the Fed under the
second half of Bernani and then Yellen
and Pal and typically the criticism has
come from the hawkish direction and
certainly in that episode his his
criticism of the Fed was that in some
certain quotes would indicate that
hawkish inclination as Well, maybe just
I can follow up because in your earlier
comment, you also mentioned his his
recent advocacy for for lower rates.
Now, it's important this is in the
context of a committee that under Pal's
leadership beginning in September of
2024 already began to cut rates. In
fact, when I did your show earlier and
we were talking about that right after I
think the initial rate cuts under under
PAL, I made reference to what I've been
calling for some time now the Fed is is
running what I call the quote 2 point
something inflation target which was
they don't like it to start with a
three, four, five, six or seven. But if
inflation gets down to 2 point
something, they can start to talk and
think about rate cuts as they did under
under PAL and in importantly at the
December Fed meeting. So just about six
weeks ago, the Fed indicated through
those very imperfect dot plots that a
majority of the committee of of that
existing committee which Kevin will
inherit felt that at least one more rate
cut this year given the circumstances
would be appropriate. So yes, Kevin has
come out in favor of rate cuts in his
public comments. don't know what he said
privately to the president, but I doubt
that they differed what he said
publicly. But that's in the context of a
committee that at least a majority of
whom think that in this year it'll be
appropriate to cut at least once.
[music]
I'm just going to keep pretending to be
an anthropologist and ask a bunch of
cultural questions, but what actually is
the role of Fed chair when you're in a
monetary policy meeting? So, you know,
let's say that Worish has some sort of
outlier opinion. I I don't know, he's
prioritizing employment versus prices or
whatever.
>> Yeah. Can he convince everyone at the
table, all the voting members to
actually change their minds?
>> Tracy, it's a great question because a
point that I like to make, at least in
my professional time, which goes back to
Paul Vulkar, we tend to talk about the
Fed is the Vulkar Fed, the Greenspan
Fed, Pal Yellen, Bernani Fed. and and
that's appropriate because in this era,
Fed shares have been persuasive and they
and they've usually got their their
their way. But importantly, the Fed as
an institution was specifically designed
by the Congress in the 1930s
in such a way that any material monetary
policy decision, do they raise or lower
interest rates or do they buy or sell
treasuries, requires an affirmative vote
of a committee comprised of 12 members.
And so as I as I've liked to say and
I'll say it again, really the power of
the Fed chair is the power of persuasion
because at the end of the day he or she
only has one vote. Now it's often argued
that well Rich that's silly because
rarely do Fed chairs get outvoted and
that that's true. It happened once or
twice under Vulkar. It it happened way
back in the 1940s. And so yes,
empirically it may appear as though
chairs always get their way, but but
remember Fed chairs know where the
committee is leaning and often times or
certain circumstances they may
themselves decide not to be on the
losing end of a particular vote but to
try to persuade the committee over time
to move in their direction. Now one
thing I can't really speak to the
Greenspan Fed but beginning under
Bernani and continuing under Yelen and
certainly with Jay Pal there is a lot of
premeating FOMC meeting communication
and indeed Pal during my time there
would have individual bilateral
discussions with the other 18 people not
just the voters but if you know there
are 12 voters and another seven Reserve
Bank presidents who don't vote in a
particular year so Pal would have 18
individual phone calls or face-toface
meetings before every uh meeting. I
don't think that was the practice under
Greenspan, for example. Um, and so part
of really what a Fed chair does is to
get a sense of where individuals on the
committee are, but really an important
power that the chair does have is the
chair sets the agenda for the meeting
and the staff briefings for the most
part are prepared by the board uh staff,
sometimes with input from the reserve
bank presidents and the board staff
reports to the chair. And so the agenda
for the meeting and often times details
about the sort of analysis that would be
useful for the discussion will be
something that the chair will have a
view on. Now now during you you asked
for anecdotes you know during during my
time because of my background in in
monetary economics chair pal J pal did
ask me to take a pretty hands-on role in
interfacing between himself and the
staff in particular the forecasting and
the monetary affairs groups but
ultimately my role was really you know
in service to what he wanted to do to
produce a successful meeting. The final
thing I'll say, you got you got me sort
of wound up.
>> It's all great.
>> The final thing I'll say is, and I think
this has been publicly uh reported, but
it's it the at a typical Fed meeting,
there is a policy announcement that
comes out at 2 p.m. That's a decision,
and the committee, of course, is
discussing that decision, but it's
discussing other options. And at a
typical meeting, in addition to the the
Fed's statement and the policy action
that was the outcome of the meeting, the
committee is also discussing
alternatives, actually tangible
alternatives, alternative A, alternative
B, alternative C. And there can be quite
extensive back and forth in the meetings
about those alternatives. And so even at
the end of the day what the public sees
is the Fed decided to keep rates on hold
and there were two dissents which were
governors and uh Waller a lot more was
being discussed at the meeting as
potential alternatives to that statement
and that decision and a lot of
discussion in meetings can be about what
the committee thinks might be
appropriate for the next meeting or the
meeting down the road. Indeed, one of
the the many things I learned I made a
promise to myself when I was in the job
to to try to learn something new every
day and and and I usually did and and
one of the things I didn't appreciate
before I got into the to the Fed is
especially the the chair and and the
palett you you really need to have a
sense of the arc of both the year in
terms of the data flow you're likely to
get and the arc of where decisions need
to be made and how they're they're made.
And and so there's a lot sort of like an
imperfect but not completely a bad
analogy is we've heard of legendary
football coaches who like script the
first 50 plays of the game. Now
sometimes they move away but they want
to have a plan about how they'll react
if the defense does a certain thing or
the other. And it's not dissimilar to
the way at least when I was at the pal
Fed that that we would be thinking not
only about the January meeting and then
start thinking about March but really
the arc of the of of the year you know
based upon your view of the data and and
a number of other considerations. So th
those are some tangible examples of the
way chairs I think put their imprint on
the on the process. So, thinking of
calling several plays in a row, we've
seen uh Kevin Wars very skeptical of
forward guidance and some of the
monetary policy innovations that
occurred in 2008, 2009, and so forth. I
think it's easy maybe for people to
forget that things like the dots, the
press conference, and so forth, these
are all very modern. For most of the
Fed's history, there was none of this
stuff. Do you think
>> I remember the invention of the dot
plot? Remember that? We were trying I
still don't get it but yeah.
>> Well, we were trying to figure out
internally at Bloomberg like the best
way to translate that information. Do
you think I mean setting aside Worsh's
view, do you think there's an argument
to be made that some of these
communication innovations that maybe
made a lot of sense during a period of
ZER where the Fed was trying to convince
the market that it would be on hold for
a very long time that maybe they can be
revisited and we don't need so much of
this stuff in normal times.
>> Yeah. So I think let's focus now on
communication since that was your
specific question but perhaps later also
talk about Kevin's other critiques which
are broadly the balance sheet sort of
mission creep in the size and the
composition of the balance sheet
>> and then third critique is is grounding
Fed policy both actions and
communication
>> more towards a policy rules framework
and a less moving away from what he
calls meeting by meeting discretion.
Let's talk about communication and and
having observed and and taught this and
and actually done it for four years. I
want to begin with a historically
factual statement that's important to
provide some context. It is perfectly
possible to conduct a very successful
monetary policy without any forward
guidance.
>> Paul Vulkar did it for eight years and
Alan Greenspan did it for 17. You know,
there would be little hints and winks
and nods, but forward guidance as we
know it today is really something that
was not really in the toolkit of of Paul
Vulkar or for the first 17 years, Alan
Greenspan. Now, Greenspan's endlessly
fascinating. And one of the fascinating
things about Greenspan is that in his
last two years, and I would say not
coincidentally at the time that Ben
Bernani was a a Fed governor, right at
the very end in 2004 to six, Greenspan
began to dip his his toe into forward
guidance. But for the most part, that
was not really uh part of of the
toolkit. So why did forward guide first
of all then what is forward guidance and
why it become part of the toolkit? Well,
at its most basic level, forward
guidance is providing information to
observers and importantly to financial
markets about the committee's
expectation of the path for interest
rates. Now, there's a huge academic
literature. I've contributed to it
myself. And one of the interesting
things that you might find that's might
be surprising about that literature is
it spent a lot of time 20 years ago
arguing that forward guidance was
irrelevant because the Fed's looking at
inflation data. The market's looking at
inflation data. If inflation's too damn
high, the Fed will raise rates. If it's
low, they'll cut [laughter] rates. So
you don't really get any you don't
really get any incremental benefit by
telling people what you're going to do
if they know you're going to do it
anyway. And so the the case for forward
guidance then has to then rest on
something other than it's okay to talk
about what you're going to do. And and
where forward guidance really became a
focus of the Fed was out of desperation
at the zero bath. So rates got cut to
zero after Lehman Brothers. The economy
was in freef fall. The financial system
was on the verge of collapse
>> and the Bernani Fed could not use
conventional policy to lower rates
because they had hit, you know, a zero
bound. And so they began to provide
guidance to the markets to essentially
reassure markets that they were not on a
hair trigger to hike rates because they
kept noticing that even though the
economy was weak, inflation was low,
unemployment was high, the bond market
kept pricing in rate hikes that they had
no intention of delivering. And so
forward guidance really took on an
important role when the Fed was trapped
at at at the zero bound. Now an
interesting correlary then is what do
you do when you raise rates above zero
and of course the pal Fed did that
beginning well yellen and then pal did
that and I was actually there for the
rate hikes in that in that cycle and the
fed by the time I had arrived
importantly because of the dots the Fed
had begun to had continued to use
forward guidance even after rates got
above zero and oftentimes the dot plot
was an input uh into that since it
provides imperfect but potentially
useful information about the committee's
intention to adjust rates. Let let me
say, however, that I think it's entirely
appropriate that Kevin Worsh or anyone
who becomes a Fed chair now think about
the cost and benefits of forward
guidance. Indeed, I've said for at least
a decade, including before when I joined
the Fed, that forward guidance and
quantitative easing are not exempt from
the laws of economics. they they have
benefits but also costs. There are
probably diminishing returns. And so I
don't think it's at all inappropriate
for the Fed under the leadership of the
chair to think about benefits and cost
of forward guidance in circumstances
when it may be useful and circumstances
when it may not be. Let me just add a
little kota here. Another dimension of
Fed communication that's changed is
really been the result of a change in
technology and access. So, you know, if
you go back to the 1980s, yes, when
Vulkar gave a speech, people would read
it and the Times and Wall Street Journal
would report on it, but other than that,
Fed communication was was pretty uh
limited. Uh and of course now of course
we all have access to the internet and
financial news and each Fed president
and and Fed governor uh give uh speeches
and so there's a lot more individual
discussion of what individuals on the
committee think would be appropriate
policy as well as formal guidance as
well. So I think that's that's sort of
where we are on on forward guidance as
of today.
>> Just one followup to that. The way I
think about it from a market perspective
is that forward guidance you know since
2008 2009 has had the effect of
dampening volatility especially in the
bond market and now if you have less
forward guidance it would seem perhaps
there's a risk that volatility makes a
return. Putting on your your PIMCO hat
from the perspective of the bond market
what would less forward guidance
actually mean? I think you hit the nail
on the head. I think the most robust
prediction I would make is it would it
would in increase to some extent market
volatility in particular interest rate
volatility and importantly and I'll just
be very direct and and and and blunt in
the decade remember rates were at zero
for seven years after the global
financial crisis. Uh Janet Yellen did
not hike rates until December of 2015.
Uh and they've been on hold for seven
years. And so not only was realized rate
volatility low at the front end of the
curve, but the Fed was using a lot of
forward guidance and a lot of
quantitative easing. And that was
suppressing interest rate volatility for
a very long period of time. And then
even once the Fed began to lift off
because it was deploying forward
guidance that also served at the margin
to suppress rate volatility. And you see
this for example the move index which is
a basically a bond market index. So
volatility got down to very low levels.
So, so part of what has been happening
really in the last several years under
the PAL Fed is bond market implied
volatility has gone up relative to the
suppressed levels of the decade before
the pandemic, but not really up to
levels that were at all unusual back in
the 1990s.
And so I think my first order assessment
is we may be going back to what I would
call more normal or preGFC levels of
rate volatility. Now the Fed is not the
only only game in town when it comes to
rate volatility. There's reasons for
rate volatility to be elevated because
of uncertainty about fiscal policy for
example uh as uh as well. You know first
of all I want to say you know I remember
the concern that the Fed had in 2009
about does the market see the Fed as a
hair trigger on inflation? I don't think
a lot of people remember this, but in
early 2009, the market was pricing in
rate hikes by the end of 2009, which
seems almost unbelievable in retrospect
when you remind us that the Fed went
seven years without a hike. So, there
really was a very intense challenge on
the Fed's hands to convince the market
that it was going to stay on hold for a
very long time. And I think forward
guidance clearly played a sort of
specific tech role there. Let's talk now
about balance sheet. Yeah,
>> Bill Dudley wrote a column for Bloomberg
Opinion uh after the Worsh nomination
and he was sort of critical. He said he
didn't think that Worsh was going to be
able to shrink the balance sheet much
further unless there were some other
changes perhaps relating to banks
capital requirements etc. Worsh's own
criticisms of the balance sheet seem a
little bit of a moving target at some
point. How well do you I mean maybe I
would ask how well does any economist
have a handle on the effects of balance
sheet policy but what's your read on
sort of the reality of wars coming
intersection perhaps with the balance
sheet
>> yeah so I think there are two related
but distinct elements to this first is
that Kevin has been publicly and
consistently critical of every expansion
in the Fed's balance sheet since the
first QE1 program so he very famously
said he was opposed to the QE2 program
in 2010. Uh although I think he did vote
for it, but then he left soon uh after.
And so there's the issue of
backwardlooking, oh, the Fed should not
have been buying treasuries and
mortgages as it did. And I think there's
no reason to think he's changed his
mind. Indeed, Secretary Bessant wrote a
piece with a very provocative title, the
Fed's, you know, gain of function uh
monetary policy. and he was also
critical in retrospect of the expansion
in the Fed's balance sheet. The
important question of course for for
OddLot's listeners and for markets is
okay that's the past looking ahead and
one of the many interesting things that
Kevin Walsh said during his I guess
campaign to become Fed chair was to call
for a new accord between the Treasury
and the Fed with regards to the balance
sheet. Now he hasn't provided a lot of
details. What we do know is what the
first accord between the Fed and the
Treasury looked like, which was back in
1951. And what was interesting about
that, it was essentially the Fed's
declaration of independence to raise
rates without getting approval from the
Treasury, which is why Fed historians
think of it as really a signal event in
Fed history. So, I don't think that's
really an issue. Now, presumably what
Kevin means when he talks about an
accord is a mutual understanding between
the Fed and the Treasury about the size
and composition of its balance sheet.
And so, for example, you could agree
that the Fed needs to have the current
size balance sheet, but it should not
own mortgage back securities or 30-year
Treasuries. It should own T bills. So,
that's a conversation you can have. You
can also also have a conversation about
the Fed having a a smaller balance
sheet. admire of Bill and I I read that
column and agreed with almost all of it.
The the point being is is to get from
here to there is is not straightforward
and in particular it involves the
banking system in terms of the level of
reserves in the banking uh system. The
Fed has been very reticent uh although
it's been tempted and it's discussed
selling mortgage back securities. You
can find it in the transcripts going
back a dozen years and two years. And so
right now there is no appetite in the
existing Fed to think about shrinking
the balance sheet through any sort of a
any sort of a sale. And then finally and
I and I do want to get this on the table
because I think it's a very important
point that is often imperfectly
appreciated is the following. In 2008,
coincident with the global financial
crisis, the Fed also achieved from
Congress the statutory authority to pay
interest on bank reserves. Until that
point, the Fed created reserves by
buying securities, but they earned a
zero uh interest rates. And that not
just the Fed, but most other central
banks now pay a market rate of interest
on bank reserves. And the reason why
that's important is the following. What
it means is that when the Fed does do a
QE program, when it buys a mortgage
security or a Treasury, it's not really
printing money in the sort of money and
banking sense that you're buying a
coupon and paying for it with a $100
bill and thus extinguishing the coupon
payment. What you're really what the Fed
really does now with modern QE and
interest on reserves is it's not
extinguishing government debt. It's just
changing the maturity composition of
government debt from fixed to floating.
Because at the end of the day, the Fed's
balance sheet and the Treasury's balance
sheet are consolidated. When the Fed's
profitable, the the the Treasury gets
that interest income. In recent years,
the Fed has not been profitable and it's
been withholding those remittances. And
so once once you think of it that way,
then you start to think about a scenario
where a Treasury Secretary could, if he
chose to say, you know what, I want to
be the big sheriff in town when it comes
to maturity composition. So if I think
there are too many 30-year treasuries,
I'll buy them and sell T bills and the
Fed can buy the T bills. And so there
are scenarios over time where we could
rethink what QE is in addition to what
the size of the balance sheet is. But
this is not, you know, a 30 minute or
you know a oneweek exercise. This will
be a pretty complicated intricate
process. But I don't want to rule out of
hand that it's something that uh is you
know beyond considering or discussing.
>> [music]
[music]
>> So other than his distaste for the size
and potentially composition of the Fed
balance sheet, there's something else
that Worsh doesn't seem to like, and
that's I guess traditional economic
models. So he's been critical of the
Phillips curve for instance. Uh he's
been critical of data dependency at the
Fed which kind of leaves the question if
you're not going to focus on data and
you're not going to focus on models what
are you actually using to formulate
monetary policy? Do you have any any
read on what that could be?
>> I think u you know and I've known Kevin
I think for a dozen years. I didn't our
our terms as fed officials did not
coincide, but I've gotten to know him
since and we've met many times and had
many conversations and the like and I
read most if not all that he writes. You
know, my my sense is really that his his
critique is that a lot of economic
models in macro tend to to put a lot of
emphasis on on the demand side of the
economy. Now I can point you to my first
speech as Fed vice chair in October 2018
where I also put on the table that
policy need to think about the supply
side of the economy and the Fed doesn't
want to be in the business of raising
rates because too many people have a job
if that's not inflationary and the the
way you sort of square that circle is
your outlook on on on productivity. And
so it is correct that if you get more
growth because you've got a more
productive economy either through
innovation or deregulation
then the Fed should not get in in the
way of that. And indeed during my time
the pal Fed didn't you know the models
uh both in the Fed and outside in 2019
were saying and indeed if you look at
Fed communication in 2017 it was saying
if the unemployment rate falls below 5%
we'll have to hike rates because that's
going to be inflationary and by the time
I got there the unemployment rate was in
the fours and we didn't have inflation
and it got down to the low threes. And
so it is correct that there is a supply
as well as a demand side to the economy.
And if the supply side can grow faster
with higher employment without
inflation, the Fed should not get in the
way with that. So I I 100% agree with
with with that. Now the the challenge is
the economy, as Jay Palace said, the
economy is constantly uh changing. And
maybe just a little a little bit of a
wonkish uh comment for the the wonks in
your audience. And and let me set the
record straight. Uh you know, the old
saying, facts are stubborn uh things.
And we all live, you know, we're all
three of us were around in the 1990s.
And Greenspan is justly uh complimented
as he should be indeed what I teach this
material. I always emphasize this period
for recognizing that because of the
internet and connectivity and personal
computing that there would potentially
was an eminent increase in pickup in
productivity. And the staff and other
governors were saying we should hike
rates and green spend. And I said, "No,
let's see. we may get this may be a
productivity-led boom and that's indeed
the story between 1995 and 1999
but if you look at the greenspan Fed in
1999 it was hiking rates even though we
had very strong productivity growth and
we had strong economic growth in the
face of a very buoyant stock market and
what people forget [laughter] is that by
2000 the federal funds rate was at 6 and
a half% so it is true that Greenspan did
hold off for several years, but by the
end of that of that uh tech internet uh
boom and dare I say irrational
exuberance, his famous phraseology,
Greenspan was hiking rates very
aggressively in the face of very strong
productivity growth. So when people
refer to that period approvingly as a
reason uh for the Fed to hold off from
from you know hiking or certainly
continuing to cut rates because of
productivity you have to look at the
entire decade. You just can't cherrypick
three or four uh years. This is
interesting. You know, just while we're
here, talk about Green Greenspan. I
mean, why did he raise rates so
aggressively? And did Greenspan's own
rate hikes in the late '9s not really
gel with his own comments about the
capacity for the economy to grow during
a time of expanding productivity?
>> The explanation, I would argue, was
really was really twofold. I I do think
by that time although I haven't
memorized the memoir but but I think by
that time the the irrational exuberance
piece was a factor there is a there is a
wealth effect so if stocks are going up
people are wealthy they spend more and
so central banks don't like to be in the
business of of pricking uh bubbles but
there is a connectivity between a very
very fully valued stock market and your
macro outlook you know we all remember
some of us remember Pets.com you know
the sock puppet Super Bowl commercials
and also I just think by that point
although inflation had not moved above I
should also mention the other
fascinating thing about that period is
it's clear now from the transcripts that
the Greenspan Fed by the mid to late 90s
was in essence running what we would now
call an inflation targeting regime and
that the target was two but Greenspan
was always resistant to the idea the Fed
should ever publicly say that they were
targeting 2% inflation but by the late
90s you have inflation moving up close
to 2% and you could really I view this
as a period where Greenspan's basically
saying I don't want to go back to the
bad old days of 8 7 5% you know
inflation and so it was probably
preemptive as well not resisting the
productivity but merely uh trying to to
keep the economy in in balance and then
the final thing I'll say sorry to be
wonky is that as a matter of economic
modeling other things being equal if
you've got faster productivity growth,
you'd expect that to move up what
economists call the neutral rate of
interest anyway. And I think actually
Bill Dudley made that point in his
column as um as well.
>> Never apologize for being wonky on this
show.
>> Good.
>> I want to go back to the question of
central bank independence. So if if we
assume that Worsh truly wants to do his
own thing outside of presidential
influence and again there are there are
some people who doubt that is the case
but if we take that premise how does he
actually display or demonstrate the
central bank's independence when you
have a president who likes to talk about
interest rates and likes to joke as we
were saying earlier about you know I'm
going to sue War if he doesn't lower
rates.
>> You also use the word campaign in you
Kevin Wars's campaign, which I thought
was an interesting choice of words to
describe the last several months.
>> That's okay. Uh that's he he's he's a
very he's a good choice. And there there
were three other candidates and um and
and it worked. I think I think there'll
be a couple things uh Tracy that that
we'll we'll see pretty soon. In fact,
I'll let I'll let you and your listeners
decide if it's a it's a joke. But one
thing I find humorous, I'll share with
you is that, you know, if if if JPL
really wanted to complicate the
situation for his successor, you know,
he cut rates at the March and the and
the April uh meeting to get the funds
rate down to the level where at least
[laughter] the committee seems to think
is the destination so that there's
nothing for the next person to do. I
don't think Powell's going to to do that
because I don't think it's
>> monetary policy by trolling. I don't
know if that's a that doesn't sound like
a Powell thing, but that would be funny.
Yeah, but you know, but but but but
there is a kernel of of truth to it,
which is as we said earlier in the in
the podcast, the power of the chair is
the power of persuasion. Wars will only
have one vote. You've got some very very
highprofile and confident people.
There's a voting rotation as your
listeners know. So right now you've got
folks like Beth Hammock and you've got
Lori Logan, Neil Qashqari in Minnesota
are are voting now and and Anna Pollson
in in Philadelphia. I I believe and you
know and Lori Logan and and and and
Hammock and and Kosh Curry will not will
not be shy publicly or I'm sure in the
meetings if they disagree with what they
would perceive and I'm not saying wars
would do this as you know we're going to
keep cutting rates below a level where
the committee seems to have a broad
sense that the neutral rate the
destination rate is going to be
somewhere in the low threes you know
three and a quarter three whatever and
so I do think that we'll under the sort
of baseline scenario for the economy uh
we we may get to that level of rates uh
sometime this year and then at that
point the issue would be depending on if
there's political pressure on on how the
worst Fed would navigate that and my
sense is notwithstanding all the
discussion of the supply side benefits
of of AI and and deregulation
you know if if the hint or the
discussion of a future rate cut would
would trigger nervousness in the
financial markets, break even inflations
go up, expected inflation measures go
up. You know, I think Worsh would and I
think War and the Fed would take that
seriously. So my my read is that he will
he will navigate the data as it comes.
uh he'll he'll want to focus on the
supply side, but but at the end of the
day, look, no no no no no Fed chair
wants to go down in the history books as
the Fed chair that squandered 40 years
of price of stability. And uh and so at
the end of the day, and this is I think
perhaps what the president was referring
to on more than one occasion when he was
thinking about who he was going to
choose. I'm paraphrasing, but he said
something like, you know, people will
say one thing and then they get in the
job and they disappoint you. And so I
think that that's an element of the of
the institution and of the committee
structure that will continue to be
relevant.
>> It's so interesting. I mean something
that's interesting is when we you
mentioned the 40 years of general price
stability. It's interesting that like
Arthur Burns that is a name that has a
lot of it's been tarnished right because
of the inflation. And yet Bernani, who
you know went through the the great
financial crisis, the worst downturn
ever, by and large is remembered as
having been a very good central bank
chief. And so it's striking that, yeah,
you have a few years of inflation,
everything, oh, you're a disaster. But
if you have a great recession underneath
your uh term, by and large, you could
still have a pretty good reputation. I
want to ask though, you know, the thing
is right now we still have above target
inflation and maybe AI will drive a
productivity boom and allow the economy
to grow very fast with low rates etc. In
the here and now though we we haven't
even gotten back to 2% yet and so and a
lot of these benefits of AI still very
theoretical.
>> Yeah. Well, I I I'll I'll be even more
blunt. I I think you can make a case
that although longer term AI uh will be
disinflationary as the productivity
benefits arrive, you can I think you
make a very plausible case that between
between now and then
the capex buildout
>> to train the models is going to be
increasing demand in a fully employed
economy before the productivity benefits
arise. And so if I were still teaching
intermediate macro, this would actually
be a pretty interesting uh case study to
go on on the chalkboard that in 5 years
you've got more GDP per worker. That's
great. That's disinflationary. But
between now and year five, you're going
to be double doubling your tech capital
spending investment, which is adding
demand before the productivity benefits
show up. So it's not a slam dunk to me
at all about what about what AI means
for for monetary policy near-term even
though maybe in five years the
productivity benefits are so large it it
will it will have a different you know
tend to be disinflationary. So I think
it's AI is complicated along every
dimension you can think. It's a
complicated technology. It has
complicated economics and social
potential ramifications and I think it's
it's not a slam dunk easy situation for
the for the central bank either. I have
one last question about central bank
independence. Setting aside Wars's
comments, something we haven't talked
about at all is the subpoena to Jerome
Powell over the um over the offices over
the renovation. Powell was very specific
in that he thought the subpoena was
motivated by punishing him or trying to
get back at him for doing rate policy
that the president didn't like. Two
things related to that. A, does the
subpoena in your view sort of add to
your worry either medium or long term
about how long the central bank truly
will be an independent institution in
the United States. And a correlary to
that, you mentioned Powell control the
uh wars by cut doing all the rate cuts.
Now, what do you see as the odds that he
stays on the board until his term as
governor ends even if he's no longer
chair?
>> First of all, there is there is
precedent and the Fed's a very very
president focused institution. Legendary
Fed chair indeed had a building named
after him. Mariner Eckles was an FDR
appointee and then when Harry Truman
became president, Harry Truman named
another Fed chair and Eckles stayed on
and and actually became a real thorn in
Truman's side. I would be surprised if
J. Pal stays on for the remainder of his
term as governor, which which runs
through uh January of 2020.
Would I be shocked if he stayed for a
meeting or or two? No. Only Powell
knows. He's been asked that question two
dozen times and he always gives the same
answer. But but I sense he's probably
not going to be staying on, you know, in
terms of this case, you know, I pal's uh
comments can can um you know, stand for
themselves. I won't weigh in. What I
will say though is we have not only this
the current thing that you just
mentioned about investigation on the on
the building, you know, we also have the
Lisa Cook case.
is going to weigh in on on on that. And
this is all sort of tied up into this
idea of can Congress establish a central
bank with a degree of independence to
raise or lower uh rates. And an
important element of this is this idea
of four cause removal. You know, beyond
that, it's just going to play out and I
don't have any particular expertise
about where it will end. But I will say
is at the end of the day I do expect
that the Fed is an institution and it's
will have sufficient independence to
raise or lower rates because of its
institutional structure and I think
ultimately the courts are going to back
that up.
>> All right, Richard Clara truly the
perfect guest. Thank you so much for
coming back on All Thoughts.
>> Thank you. Thanks, Rich. That was great.
>> [music]
>> So, that was a really fun conversation.
I like the idea or I'm not sure I like I
am intrigued by the idea of uh monetary
policy by trolling. [laughter]
>> That'd be so funny if there was like no
room left to cut by the time Kevin got
there and then he couldn't um fulfill
any inclination to cut. But I think it
actually raises an important point and
I'm thinking back to the conversation we
did with Emmy Nakamura where she talks
about central banks building up a sort
of store of credibility and then having
to spend it at various points. If you
have a president who is so opinionated
when it comes to interest rates and
certainly not shy about tweeting or
talking about them, I feel like it
inherently starts to spend down some of
that credibility because it just becomes
very very difficult I think to
demonstrate your own independence.
>> Yeah, I think it's going to be really
tricky. You know, it's obviously
something we talked about with Scand
last week, which is that there's
multiple potential nominees who would
have come in with a willingness to cut
rates further at this point. Christopher
Waller being an obvious one. He's been
voting for rate cuts, but he also has a
lot of credibility because he was voting
for rate hikes and, you know, 2022,
2023, and so forth. I think it's going
to be uh, you know, it'll be tricky for
War and But on the other hand, look, I
would say also, you know, it's easy to
say, oh, he's got to come in, he's got
to build credibility. A lot of people
really like him. A lot of people who
have worked with him at various times,
who have known him think he's a serious
thinker, that he knows what he's talking
about, that even if he doesn't always
agree with them, particularly on things
related to the balance sheet
communication, that he's a honest
broker. So maybe, you know, maybe we are
overstating the risks or maybe it's easy
to overstate the risk that he comes in
and has a real fight on his hands to get
the uh policy agenda that he wants.
>> Oh, to be a fly on the wall of the first
meeting with War, right?
>> Yeah, that'll it'll be uh it'll be super
interesting. I also really like I wonder
if he's going to get rid of the press
conference. That's my prediction.
>> I would not be surprised. And you know
what I'll say like [snorts]
>> these are new things. It's not a it's
it's not like he'd be overturning 80
years of president here. This is a very
modern thing. And a lot of the
communications innovations were as rich
said a very specific purpose when the
Fed was at Zerp to convince the market
that it would stay low because and they
needed to make that case. So if there's
a sort of honest look at all of these
postGFC monetary policy changes, I don't
I I [clears throat] certainly think
that's totally fine.
>> I think Jackson Hole might be in danger,
too.
>> You think so?
>> Yeah, maybe. [sighs and gasps] just out
of pure self-interest. I hope not. I
hope not, too. I like enjoy going to one
of the most beautiful places on Earth
every year. But we'll see.
>> Yeah. Uh I hope I hope it doesn't go
away.
>> All right. Shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the Odd
Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Follow our producers
Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen Dashel
Bennett at Dashbot and Kalebrooks at
Kalebrooks. And for more OddLots
content, go to bloomberg.com/odlots
or the daily newsletter and all of our
episodes. And you can chat about all of
these topics 247 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlots.
>> And if you enjoy OddLots, if you like it
when we talk about new Fed chairs
[music] with former vice chairs, then
please leave us a positive review on
your favorite podcast platform. And
remember, if you are a Bloomberg [music]
subscriber, you can listen to all of our
episodes absolutely adree. All you need
to do is find the Bloomberg channel on
Apple Podcast [music] and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.
[music]